Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprize of what had happened; it was impossible to think of any thing else, and totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she turned up the lane, which led her farther from the turnpike road. The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground.

After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent, had made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park; he was moving that way; and fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced, was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate. He had by that time reached it also, and holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said with a look of haughty composure, "I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter? And then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight."

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:

Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes, which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.

Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley from your sister and the other, that I had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity, and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be obeyed and further apology would be absurd.

I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister, to any other young woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted by Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage. He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend's behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the evening's scrutiny, that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment. If you have not been mistaken here I must have been in an error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error, to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and air was such, as might have given the most acute observer, a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain but I will venture to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the marriage were not merely those, which I last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil on her side as on mine. Add to this, that my remote information of your sister's character would not have allowed me to hope so entirely happy a change in my own situation, as that I must have expected, from proceeding on so very slim foundations, the blindness of preference, or the caprice of fondness.

These, madam, were the principal facts and considerations, which have last night been called into my examination, and which still remain the chief objections to a marriage, which I must continue to oppose, with as much energy as zeal; and which would make any mode of pursuing it impossible, by her who is my sister. What I told you of my own feelings, are on this head, unalterable, but what I related of your sister's, may be very materially altered, for in so unfair a survey as mine, error is very probable.

The other point of my accusation is far more serious; but it is attended by circumstances of a very different character, founded in errors of less moment, and capable of better explanation. My ignorance of those circumstances was indeed excusable, but my ignorance is no excuse for the affront and injury I have thereby given you. I must relate what those circumstances are.

It is now nearly two years since I saw Mr. Wickham; but in the interval there has been nothing to change his situation, or mine, or our mutual feelings. He was my father's friend, and bound to him by every tie of gratitude and affection. Our mother's early death, our father's attachment to his character, and his very considerable fortune, gave him a complete establishment in our family before he was twenty. His intimacy was necessarily intimate, and was enjoyed by my father, with all that unreserved confidence which marks the whole style of his correspondence. The tone of their letters to each other, unwatched by the world, is the open language of real brotherhood.

I never saw any body in whom I had more perfect reliance for honest counsel, than in my father, on the loss of my mother. He would advise me as to what I ought to do, as well as what I might do, with the tenderness of a parent, and the affection of a friend.

Between the son of this man, and the son of his friend, there was a close resemblance in character, in dispositions, and in education. We were brought up together; allowed every liberty, encouraged to union, by our parents and everything within our power or their power, was done for the preservation of that cordiality between us, which might be supposed to make two persons, though distinguished in property, more equal in every other respect, still more nearly the same.

With such a father and such a friend, I might be reasonably expected to have a very high opinion of myself, and to be ill prepared for any occurrence that might bring it on its trial, or shake it in the least. But I had my senses, and was not suffered to enjoy the unanimated security of ignorance. It was not to be that I should grow up without being made aware, at least, of the vices of human nature. My father was a good Christian, a rational being, and as such he had not only formed his principles on the doctrine of self-denial in the purest gospel, but in his reasoning on every subject, and his experience of the world, he acknowledged and taught the universality of weaknes and wickedness. With this kind of preparation I was not likely to remain long in that security of self-applause, in which the less informed part of their fellow creatures, who have never been suffered to call the inner qualities of their own hearts to their recollection, are often long indulged. The truth is, that I had always found my father rational and reasonable, in every thing that related to his own immediate pleasures; but in the more important business of life, in the preservation of his character, and the proper discharge of his public duties, his reason was often baffled and overcame by those very qualities which ought to have been most at his command, by too great mildness and too great forbearance.

It was not till some eight or nine months after my entering on my father's possessions, that the first occasion of reproof, or rather of caution, on his side, was bestowed. I had then just entered on the enjoyment of the powers of a guardian, in the person of my young cousin, the son of my late uncle's daughter, when I was apprised by my steward, that my late uncle had not, as was his custom, left any specific direction, relative to the education of his child, but had only written on the occasion, a few lines, in a postscript to the last letter he ever gave me, which were to this effect, "You will see, by this time, in another hand, my dear boy, that I have left little Harry to your care. I do not like to make you a letter on the subject, because I wish to see you and Harry together, and have no doubt of your doing all that is right with him. But think of him sometimes in your prayers, and be assured that you will do more to make him happy, and to form his character, by your setting him an example of every thing that is virtuous and excellent, than by all the restraints or precepts you may be able to bestow."

His attachment to this boy was very strong; and I had always expected to be named as his guardian. I did not, however, comprehend his full meaning in these lines, till some months after I had received them, when an occasion happened of making the trial of my own discretion, in a manner in which I had never before been exercised, and in which I might really be called on to be a father to him.

The circumstance was this. In my search for my late uncle's effects, I found, amongst many other papers, a letter, which had been written by him to Mr. Wickham, some few weeks before his death, and which, by an accident, had never been sent. It contained a statement of all the particular circumstances, relative to the affair with Miss Darcy, which had ever passed between them, and in explaining his reason for finally refusing to do what was requested, he avowed his sense of his friend's merit to be such, as to make him grieve for his jealousy of his abilities. He said much of his honour, and his veracity, and in vindicating his own character, in respect of their former friendship, mentioned many of their intimate communications. His forbearance, however, in spite of this favourable disposition, he principally attributed to the persuasion that his daughter had entered into an engagement with him.

This letter, as I may have mentioned to you before, was never intended to be sent; it was intended for a mere memorandum, in case the subject should ever again be brought forward. But in spite of the caution with which he was guarded, I found in the letter an unequivocal statement of the having, many years ago, seduced the elopement of the younger sister of his own intimate friend, after the removal of every obstacle of a parental authority, and of the marriage which had been the consequence, and of his having, at the time of this elopement, given his friend the most solemn assurance of his giving her in marriage, was a thing which the world was to see.

I was shocked; and, after pervading the letter again and again, and becoming more and more convinced by its internal evidence, of its truth, my first emotions were given to the practice of indignation, in which I was so far from being cooled by the reflections that my father, in all probability, had been deceived by the same appearances of deception, but in which I was soon after in some degree recovered by the consideration that the whole, whatever it might be, was now past and beyond remedy, and that my father's character, though highly and meritoriously suffered in it, could not be further injured by the publication of the facts.

I was then about two and twenty; my mind was not habitually calm, my temper was, I believe, a little irritable, my judgement was not ripe, and my heart was never light. The consequences of what I suffered and what I did, are no way to be retrieved; but as they may, perhaps, be lessening to me in the eyes of your friend, when she hears that I had such motives for my surprise, they shall not be concealed from her.

Besides a general sense of distress and indignation, what I then felt may be best described by a comparison with my behaviour at the time of the loss of my mother. It was the turn of a feeling which had been long and deeply harboured; it was the solution of a long and heavily accumulating dream. The wretchedness of an affliction, with which there was no means of comparing it, and the impossibility of concealing the emotions into which it threw me, made me at once an object of compassion and resentment to every one who observed me; and I was obliged to fly from every human face and human eye.

I had no servant with me but a single old woman, and even from her I avoided to escape, as far as I could, from the sympathies of every other being. For several days I left the house, and wandered alone. The wild scenes of the Highlands, to which I had been frequently used in boyish excursions, were all the places that I sought, and from the terrors of storms and the shades of winter's woods, I derived a dark delight.

A morbid habit was increasing in me; I began to have a pleasure in thinking and speaking of my sufferings. This is a madness soon fatal to the human character and happiness.

When I returned to my house, my endeavour was to shut myself up from it, and to collect and fix all my thoughts on Jane.

This occupation was sometimes successful. It had always been so, whenever the happiness of Jane was not concerned in it, for in the contemplation of her excellence, my feelings would be calm and self-appreciative, but my reason would not be satisfied, or my conscience quieted. It was a feverish imagination, that it was possible I could be deserving of her, by the most mortifying and difficult self-denial.

The consequence of these, and other reflections of the same nature, was a resolution, on my part, of permanently renouncing the world, and dedicating all the energies of my mind to the cure of my own, and the promotion of the general, character.

A week's solitary meditation, in a bleak and open chamber formerly my own, produced on my mind a kind of manual prayer, which it seemed in particular calls to do, and as the cure, I conceived, could not be effected too soon, I delayed not longer than the next month to set out on an ecclesiastical tour, throughout the most remote and desolate parts of the country.

I do not pretend to say that my renunciation would have long continued, if the circumstance of Miss Bingley's marrying a man to whom she was by no means indifferent, and of my being, by the same event, placed in a family where my moods could be watched, and my deficiencies counted, had not materially assisted the decision.

By the strength of other habits, I was now a man of variableness, and of little content; but the general tone was set.

The truth is, that, at this very period, I had not a moment's doubt that my character was perfect, in the sense in which I used the word. I had been a hypocrite all my life, in the most genuine sense of the term; and now I had at last found out the fact.

What was to be done? The die was cast; my character was fixed; and my affections were determined. But how was it to be done? How was it to be done? How was it to be done?

I know not.

But the conclusion is, that I am, and have been for a long time, a most wretched creature, and that I am going about to make you, who have done me so much good, still more wretched by telling you so.

I am, madam, as I must ever be, very truly yours.

F. Darcy

Elizabeth, as she read, saw in a moment how whole it was. She read it over again, and then read it a third time. Only two or three lines at the end were legible; the rest of the page was a mere blur, though she could easily make out that it was only the repetition of the same painful language, in a more connected form, of what she had read before.

As soon as she was able to attain a little composure, she began to think; but at first it was only to flutter amongst expectations and hopes. It was impossible for her to read the letter a second time; it was impossible for her to collect her thoughts; and thinking and reading were, for some time, equally unattempted and impossible.

At length she began to write in answer; but, after putting down a word or two, found herself altogether unable to compose a letter. "I am not equal to it. I am not equal to it. It is too painful."

Such were her languishing exclamations for a half-hour. At last she began again. It was no use; she could not get a word out. Still it must be done. Sit down she did, and tried in vain for half an hour; and at length, with aConsistency of resolution for which she had never previously given herself credit, she wrote,

"I am obedient, madam, to the commands which contain so many and so generous acknowledgements, in returning this letter. I will not abuse the honour which you have so unexpectedly conferred on me, by attempting a personal reply; but I must acquaint you that I have read your letter with the very great surprize which its style and its contents have given me.

"I owe you many apologies, but not these. You could not have written the letter you did, and I could not be the girl I am, but we should have felt less.

"You must give me leave to accept the friendly intelligence of your amiable sister's approach, and to trust the mutual relief of it, to your own and her tenderness and affection.

"Your letter, I am too conscious, would have had a very different effect, had you known in what manner I had been spending the days and hours which it must have taken you to write.

"It is, in truth, unhappily, too true, that most of that time was spent in reading and re-reading your letter, and in endeavouring to make out its meaning. But I have been obliged to read it several times over. I might have been spared the repetition of so ineffectual an effort, by a letter less ambiguously worded. Your expressions might have been somewhat more clear, and somewhat more methodized. In general, I must allow you to write a very misleading letter.

"But I ought to thank you. In being so explicitly, and so minutely, and so precisely, and so clearly, and so strongly, and so powerfully, and so energetically, and so eloquently, and so magnificently, and so sublimely, and so beautifully, and so sweetly, and so tenderly, and so affectionately, and so earnestly, and so sincerely, and so honestly, and so truly, and so really, and so deeply, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly, and so profoundly"
